

.. _sphx_glr_examples_example_plot_thredds.py:


Load a thredds dataset
======================

In the following example we will load a thredds dataset from the
norwegian met.no thredds server.




.. code-block:: python


    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    import pymepps








The first step is to load the dataset. This will be performed with
pymepps.open\_model\_dataset. The NetCDF4 backend is also supporting
opendap paths. So we could specify nc as data type.




.. code-block:: python


    metno_path = 'http://thredds.met.no/thredds/dodsC/meps25files/' \
        'meps_det_pp_2_5km_latest.nc'
    metno_ds = pymepps.open_model_dataset(metno_path, 'nc')








The resulting dataset is a SpatialDataset. The dataset has several
methods to load a xr.DataArray from the path. It also possible to print
the content of the dataset. The content contains the dataset type, the
number of file handlers within the dataset and all available data
variables.




.. code-block:: python


    print(metno_ds)






.. rst-class:: sphx-glr-script-out

 Out::

    SpatialDataset
    --------------
    File handlers: 1
    Variables: ['air_pressure_at_sea_level', 'air_temperature_2m', 'altitude', 'cloud_area_fraction', 'fog_area_fraction', 'forecast_reference_time', 'helicopter_triggered_index', 'high_type_cloud_area_fraction', 'land_area_fraction', 'low_type_cloud_area_fraction', 'medium_type_cloud_area_fraction', 'precipitation_amount', 'precipitation_amount_acc', 'precipitation_amount_high_estimate', 'precipitation_amount_low_estimate', 'precipitation_amount_middle_estimate', 'precipitation_amount_prob_low', 'projection_lambert', 'relative_humidity_2m', 'surface_air_pressure', 'thunderstorm_index_combined', 'wind_speed_maxarea_10m', 'wind_speed_of_gust', 'x_wind_10m', 'y_wind_10m']


The next step is to select/extract a variable from the Dataset. We will
select the air temperature in 2 metre height and print the content of
the resulting data




.. code-block:: python


    metno_t2m = metno_ds.select('air_temperature_2m')
    print(metno_t2m)
    metno_t2m.isel(validtime=0).plot()
    plt.show()





.. image:: /examples/images/sphx_glr_example_plot_thredds_001.png
    :align: center


.. rst-class:: sphx-glr-script-out

 Out::

    <xarray.DataArray 'air_temperature_2m' (runtime: 1, ensemble: 1, validtime: 67, height: 1, y: 929, x: 719)>
    array([[[[[[ 291.478027, ...,  291.090332],
               ..., 
               [ 278.397949, ...,  282.883789]]],


             ..., 
             [[[ 291.09082 , ...,  290.721008],
               ..., 
               [ 278.949707, ...,  279.577637]]]]]])
    Coordinates:
      * validtime  (validtime) datetime64[ns] 2017-07-19T06:00:00 ...
      * height     (height) float32 2.0
      * x          (x) float64 -8.974e+05 -8.949e+05 -8.924e+05 -8.899e+05 ...
      * y          (y) float64 -1.104e+06 -1.102e+06 -1.099e+06 -1.097e+06 ...
        longitude  (y, x) float64 1.918 1.954 1.989 2.025 2.06 2.096 2.131 2.167 ...
        latitude   (y, x) float64 52.3 52.31 52.31 52.32 52.32 52.32 52.33 52.33 ...
      * ensemble   (ensemble) int64 0
      * runtime    (runtime) object None
    Attributes:
        long_name:                       Screen level temperature (T2M)
        standard_name:                   air_temperature
        units:                           K
        _ChunkSizes:                     [  1   1 929 719]
        Conventions:                     CF-1.6
        institution:                     Norwegian Meteorological Institute, MET ...
        creator_url:                     met.no
        summary:                         MEPS (MetCoOp-Ensemble Prediction System...
        title:                           MEPS 2.5km
        geospatial_lat_min:              51.0
        geospatial_lat_max:              88.0
        geospatial_lon_min:              -20.0
        geospatial_lon_max:              80.0
        references:                      unknown
        license:                         https://www.met.no/en/free-meteorologica...
        comment:                         none
        history:                         2017-07-19 creation by fimex
        min_time:                        2017-07-19 06:00 UTC
        max_time:                        2017-07-22 00:00 UTC
        source:                          meps
        DODS_EXTRA.Unlimited_Dimension:  time
        name:                            air_temperature_2m


We could see that the resulting data is a normal xarray.DataArray and
all of the DataArray methods could be used. The coordinates of the
DataArray are normalized. The DataArray is expanded with an accessor.
Also the coordinates are normalized. We could access the accessor with
metno\_t2m.pp. The main methods of the accessor are allowing a grid
handling. So our next step is to explore the grid of the DataArray.




.. code-block:: python


    print(metno_t2m.pp.grid)






.. rst-class:: sphx-glr-script-out

 Out::

    ProjectionGrid
    --------------
    gridtype = projection
    xlongname = x-coordinate in Cartesian system
    xname = x
    xunits = m
    ylongname = y-coordinate in Cartesian system
    yname = y
    yunits = m
    proj4 = +proj=lcc +lat_0=63 +lon_0=15 +lat_1=63 +lat_2=63 +no_defs +R=6.371e+06
    gridsize = 667951.0
    xsize = 719.0
    ysize = 929.0
    xdimname = x
    ydimname = y
    xfirst = -897442.2
    xinc = 2500.0
    yfirst = -1104322.0
    yinc = 2500.0
    grid_mapping = projection_lambert
    grid_mapping_name = lambert_conformal_conic
    standard_parallel = [63.0, 63.0]
    longitude_of_central_meridian = 15.0
    latitude_of_projection_origin = 63.0
    earth_radius = 6371000.0


We could see that the grid is a grid with a defined projection. In our
next step we will slice out an area around Hamburg. We will see that a
new DataArray with a new grid is created.




.. code-block:: python


    hh_bounds = [9, 54, 11, 53]
    t2m_hh = metno_t2m.pp.sellonlatbox(hh_bounds)
    print(t2m_hh.pp.grid)
    print(t2m_hh)






.. rst-class:: sphx-glr-script-out

 Out::

    UnstructuredGrid
    ----------------
    gridtype = unstructured
    xlongname = longitude
    xname = lon
    xunits = degrees
    ylongname = latitude
    yname = lat
    yunits = degrees
    gridsize = 2401
    <xarray.DataArray (runtime: 1, ensemble: 1, validtime: 67, height: 1, ncells: 2401)>
    array([[[[[ 288.434265, ...,  287.86261 ]],

             ..., 
             [[ 289.025787, ...,  286.954559]]]]])
    Coordinates:
      * runtime    (runtime) object None
      * ensemble   (ensemble) int64 0
      * validtime  (validtime) datetime64[ns] 2017-07-19T06:00:00 ...
      * height     (height) float32 2.0
      * ncells     (ncells) int64 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 ...
    Attributes:
        long_name:                       Screen level temperature (T2M)
        standard_name:                   air_temperature
        units:                           K
        _ChunkSizes:                     [  1   1 929 719]
        Conventions:                     CF-1.6
        institution:                     Norwegian Meteorological Institute, MET ...
        creator_url:                     met.no
        summary:                         MEPS (MetCoOp-Ensemble Prediction System...
        title:                           MEPS 2.5km
        geospatial_lat_min:              51.0
        geospatial_lat_max:              88.0
        geospatial_lon_min:              -20.0
        geospatial_lon_max:              80.0
        references:                      unknown
        license:                         https://www.met.no/en/free-meteorologica...
        comment:                         none
        history:                         2017-07-19 creation by fimex
        min_time:                        2017-07-19 06:00 UTC
        max_time:                        2017-07-22 00:00 UTC
        source:                          meps
        DODS_EXTRA.Unlimited_Dimension:  time
        name:                            air_temperature_2m


We sliced a longitude and latitude box around the given grid. So we
sliced the data in a longitude and latitude projection. Our original
grid was in another projection with unstructured lat lon coordinates. So
it is not possible to create a structured grid based on this slice. So
the grid becomes an unstructured grid. In the next step we will show the
remapping capabilities of the pymepps grid structure.



If we slice the data we have seen that the structured grid could not
maintained. So in the next step we will create a structured LonLatGrid
from scratch. After the grid building we will remap the raw DataArray
basen on the new grid.

The first step is to calculate the model resolution in degree.




.. code-block:: python


    res = 2500   # model resolution in metre
    earth_radius = 6371000 # Earth radius in metre
    res_deg = np.round(res*360/(earth_radius*2*np.pi), 4)
    # rounded model resolution equivalent in degree if it where on the equator
    print(res_deg)






.. rst-class:: sphx-glr-script-out

 Out::

    0.0225


Our next step is to build the grid. The grid implementation is inspired
by the climate data operators. So to build the grid we will use the same
format.




.. code-block:: python


    grid_dict = dict(
        gridtype='lonlat',
        xsize=int((hh_bounds[2]-hh_bounds[0])/res_deg),
        ysize=int((hh_bounds[1]-hh_bounds[3])/res_deg),
        xfirst=hh_bounds[0],
        xinc=res_deg,
        yfirst=hh_bounds[3],
        yinc=res_deg,
    )








Now we use our grid dict together with the GridBuilder to build our
grid.




.. code-block:: python


    builder = pymepps.GridBuilder(grid_dict)
    hh_grid = builder.build_grid()
    print(hh_grid)






.. rst-class:: sphx-glr-script-out

 Out::

    LonLatGrid
    ----------
    gridtype = lonlat
    xlongname = longitude
    xname = lon
    xunits = degrees
    ylongname = latitude
    yname = lat
    yunits = degrees
    xsize = 88
    ysize = 44
    xfirst = 9
    xinc = 0.0225
    yfirst = 53
    yinc = 0.0225


Now we created the grid. The next step is a remapping of the raw
DataArray to the new Grid. We will use th enearest neighbour approach to
remap the data.




.. code-block:: python


    t2m_hh_remapped = metno_t2m.pp.remapnn(hh_grid)

    print(t2m_hh_remapped)






.. rst-class:: sphx-glr-script-out

 Out::

    <xarray.DataArray (runtime: 1, ensemble: 1, validtime: 67, height: 1, lat: 44, lon: 88)>
    array([[[[[[ 288.265228, ...,  288.897858],
               ..., 
               [ 287.495361, ...,  289.750275]]],


             ..., 
             [[[ 287.590698, ...,  287.320648],
               ..., 
               [ 285.674713, ...,  290.341522]]]]]])
    Coordinates:
      * runtime    (runtime) object None
      * ensemble   (ensemble) int64 0
      * validtime  (validtime) datetime64[ns] 2017-07-19T06:00:00 ...
      * height     (height) float32 2.0
      * lat        (lat) float64 53.0 53.02 53.05 53.07 53.09 53.11 53.14 53.16 ...
      * lon        (lon) float64 9.0 9.023 9.045 9.068 9.09 9.113 9.135 9.158 ...
    Attributes:
        long_name:                       Screen level temperature (T2M)
        standard_name:                   air_temperature
        units:                           K
        _ChunkSizes:                     [  1   1 929 719]
        Conventions:                     CF-1.6
        institution:                     Norwegian Meteorological Institute, MET ...
        creator_url:                     met.no
        summary:                         MEPS (MetCoOp-Ensemble Prediction System...
        title:                           MEPS 2.5km
        geospatial_lat_min:              51.0
        geospatial_lat_max:              88.0
        geospatial_lon_min:              -20.0
        geospatial_lon_max:              80.0
        references:                      unknown
        license:                         https://www.met.no/en/free-meteorologica...
        comment:                         none
        history:                         2017-07-19 creation by fimex
        min_time:                        2017-07-19 06:00 UTC
        max_time:                        2017-07-22 00:00 UTC
        source:                          meps
        DODS_EXTRA.Unlimited_Dimension:  time
        name:                            air_temperature_2m


To plot the data in a map, we have to slice the data. We will select the
first validtime as plotting parameter.




.. code-block:: python


    t2m_hh_remapped.isel(validtime=0).plot()
    plt.show()





.. image:: /examples/images/sphx_glr_example_plot_thredds_002.png
    :align: center




In the map around Hamburg we could see the north and baltic sea in the
top edges. But with the nearest enighbour approach we retain some of the
sharp edges at the map. Our last step is a second remap plot, this time
with a bilinear approach.




.. code-block:: python


    # sphinx_gallery_thumbnail_number = 3
    metno_t2m.pp.remapbil(hh_grid).isel(validtime=0).plot()
    plt.show()


.. image:: /examples/images/sphx_glr_example_plot_thredds_003.png
    :align: center




**Total running time of the script:** ( 1 minutes  8.125 seconds)



.. container:: sphx-glr-footer


  .. container:: sphx-glr-download

     :download:`Download Python source code: example_plot_thredds.py <example_plot_thredds.py>`



  .. container:: sphx-glr-download

     :download:`Download Jupyter notebook: example_plot_thredds.ipynb <example_plot_thredds.ipynb>`

.. rst-class:: sphx-glr-signature

    `Generated by Sphinx-Gallery <https://sphinx-gallery.readthedocs.io>`_
